feat: Add Payment Terms with Well-Defined Schedules (#602)
Universal-Commerce-Protocol/ucp: docs/specification/payment-terms.md

#### Schedule

{{ schema_fields('types/schedule', 'payment_terms') }}

#### Schedule Type

{{ schema_fields('types/schedule_type', 'payment_terms') }}

#### Entity Reference

{{ schema_fields('types/entity_ref', 'payment_terms') }}

#### Available Payment Instrument (Payment Terms)

{{ extension_schema_fields('payment_terms.json#/$defs/available_payment_instrument', 'payment_terms') }}

#### Payment Instrument (Payment Terms)

{{ extension_schema_fields('payment_terms.json#/$defs/payment_instrument', 'payment_terms') }}

## Payment schedules

Payment schedules use `type` as an open string vocabulary. Well-known values are:

| Type | Meaning |
| :--- | :------ |
| `immediate` | Payment is due when checkout is completed. |
| `deferred` | Payment is due after checkout completion, according to `due_at`. |

Businesses MAY use additional values. Platforms MUST tolerate unknown schedule
types and either apply business-specific support or surface clear validation
messages when a selected payment instrument cannot satisfy them.

An `immediate` schedule **MUST** omit `due_at`; a `deferred` schedule **MUST**
include a non-empty `due_at`. The shared Schedule fields are:

> * `anchor_date` — RFC 3339 reference point. If omitted, the anchor is the

Reviewer: `the anchor is the instant successful checkout completion creates the order.`

This reads weirdly.

Reviewer 2: so anchor = creation_date?

  instant successful checkout completion creates the order.

> * `offset` — ISO 8601 duration from the anchor to the first occurrence.

Reviewer: I'd suggest consistently using `anchor_date` if that's the name of the field.

* `interval` — ISO 8601 duration between recurring occurrences.
* `occurrences` — finite number of occurrences; **MUST** be present when
  `interval` is present.

Each payment schedule has `totals[]`. For a recurring schedule, those totals
apply to each occurrence. Expanding every occurrence, the sum of schedule

> `total` entries **MUST** equal the checkout `total` exactly once.

Reviewer 2: In case of uneven totals due to 'occurrences' ie 100 split into 3. Should the merchant send multiple schedules so the totals adds up?

## Selecting a payment term

Selecting a payment term is a **Checkout update**. A Platform sets
`selected_term_id`; the Business returns a recomputed Checkout. That response is
**authoritative for all derived state** — including `totals`, line item prices,
discount eligibility, `policies[]`, `messages[]`, and the payment handlers
offered.

A Platform **MUST NOT** assume that the amounts shown in `terms[]`
survive selection unchanged, and **MUST** re-render from the response.

A Business **MUST** make `terms[].id` unique within a Checkout, so
that a selection resolves to exactly one term.

In every response that carries `terms`, one of them is selected. Where the Buyer
has made no choice, the Business selects a default.

A Platform changes the selection through Update Checkout, setting
`selected_term_id` to an `id` from the latest `terms[]`. A Platform **MUST**
omit it on create, because term IDs are scoped to a Checkout and no options
exist yet — the create response establishes the options, if any, and the default
among them. A Platform **MUST** omit it on complete, because the term is settled
before a Checkout can reach `ready_for_complete`, and the instrument is

> authorized against the checkout total. A Business receiving a selection that no

Reviewer 3: Should this sentence be reworded? 

First, "authorized" is a word this extension disclaims. payment_schedule.type says "whether a due payment is authorized, captured, or settled at that moment is payment-handler behavior and outside this extension," and Out of scope repeats it. This is the one place the document makes an authorization claim, and it is the one claim it disclaims everywhere else. It is also not true of the lodging example on this page, where the checkout total is 120000 and the amount taken at completion is 30000.

```suggestion
among them. A Platform **MUST** omit it on complete, because the term is already
agreed before a Checkout can reach `ready_for_complete`, and the amount due at
completion follows from it. A Business receiving a selection that no
```

longer resolves — because the options changed — **MUST NOT** silently substitute
a term, and **MUST** report the change as a `payment_term_changed` warning in
`messages[]`.

Selecting a term can invalidate a selection previously accepted elsewhere in the
Checkout — a deferred term may not be available with a same-day fulfillment

> option. The Business resolves the conflict, returns the authoritative state, and
> **MUST** report the change as a `payment_term_changed` warning in `messages[]`.

Reviewer 3: Both rules that emit `payment_term_changed` fire on the same thing: which term is selected. One covers a `selected_term_id` that no longer resolves, the other covers the Business swapping the selection to fix a conflict elsewhere. Line 164 gives the reason for having a code at all, that "a Platform can therefore detect a changed selection from the code alone, rather than by comparing responses."

Neither fires when the selected term keeps its `id` and its contents change. That is the underwriting case from the comment above:

- The Platform displays `pt_pay_in_4` as four payments of $25.
- The Buyer selects it, and underwriting runs.
- The Business returns `pt_pay_in_4` with three payments and a larger first amount.

Same id, so no warning is required, and the Platform can only notice by diffing responses. A swapped selection is at least visible as a different id. A rewritten schedule changes what the Buyer will be charged and when, while looking unchanged at the id level, so the case that needs the signal most is the one case that does not get it.

Should the rule key on the term rather than on the selection?

```suggestion
option. The Business resolves the conflict, returns the authoritative state, and
**MUST** report the change as a `payment_term_changed` warning in `messages[]`.
A Business **MUST** also report that warning where it changes the selected term
in place, by altering its schedules, due dates, or amounts, without naming a
different term.
```

      "id": "sched_3",
      "type": "deferred",
      "description": { "plain": "Due September 29, 2026." },
      "due_at": "2026-09-29T00:00:00Z",
      "totals": [{ "type": "total", "amount": 2500 }]
    },
    {
      "id": "sched_4",
      "type": "deferred",
      "description": { "plain": "Due October 13, 2026." },
      "due_at": "2026-10-13T00:00:00Z",
      "totals": [{ "type": "total", "amount": 2500 }]
    }
  ]
}
```

### Subscription enrollment

> $29.99 per month, cancel anytime.

The checkout charges the first cycle. The ongoing arrangement is **disclosed**,
not scheduled: a later cycle is a future purchase the Buyer can decline by
cancelling, so it is not an amount owed for this checkout.

**Payment term — one immediate schedule for cycle one:**

<!-- ucp:example schema=shopping/payment_terms def=payment_term -->
```json
{
  "id": "pt_monthly",
  "title": "Monthly",
  "description": { "plain": "$29.99 today, then monthly until you cancel." },
  "schedules": [
    {
      "id": "sched_cycle_1",
      "type": "immediate",
      "description": { "plain": "Due today. Covers your first month." },
      "totals": [{ "type": "total", "amount": 2999 }]
    }
  ]
}
```

> **Policy — the durable terms.** The recurrence concerns the subscribed item

Reviewer 2: Just to confirm, the subscription-policy-disclosure is to inform the user of this recurring payment but this payment term is for one schedule and one payment only.
We will need the PR #629 to establish a recurring subscription_id.

Reviewer 4: https://github.com/Universal-Commerce-Protocol/ucp/pull/602#issuecomment-5254020548
